--- PAGE 1 ---
Examining Water Pollution in Dana Point Ocean 
David Liu 
E80 Team 27, Section 2, May 8th, 2026 
AbstractвҖ” This paper outlines the design, deployment, and 
analysis of an autonomous underwater vehicle aimed at 
investigating the levels of water pollution at Dana Point as a 
result of human activity and increasing carbon emissions. This 
project utilizes a combination of 4 sensors, pH, temperature, 
turbidity, and pressure, to autonomously collect data and 
quantify levels of water pollution at Dana Point. The project is 
motivated by the concern that increasing carbon emissions and 
pollution from human activity are causing a substantial increase 
in carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. To maintain 
equilibrium, the ocean begins absorbing carbon dioxide as well, 
leading to ocean acidification and lowering the overall pH of the 
ocean. The main takeaway from this project is that the 
temperature and pH of the ocean at Dana Point did not change 
significantly across depths between 0 and 2 meters, while 
turbidity increased as the robot went further down towards the 
ocean floor. This suggests that, within the surface 2-meter layer 
of water, water pollution indicators remained relatively low, but 
around the ocean floor, due to the settling of sediment, there is a 
larger presence of solid sediment and a greater suspended 
particulate matter concentration. This is relevant in the scope of 
engineering because autonomous vehicles can be deployed to 
monitor environmental factors and pollution, which provides 
critical data for ocean conservation efforts. 
 
I.вҖӢ INTRODUCTION 
Carbon emissions are becoming an increasingly urgent 
issue, with human industrial activity continuing to rise. As 
carbon emissions in the atmosphere increase, the ocean begins 
absorbing excess carbon dioxide in the form of carbonic acid, 
contributing to a process called ocean acidification. Ocean 
acidification is the lowering of the pH of ocean water, which 
is mainly caused by carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. It 
lowers the presence of carbonate ions in ocean water, making 
it harder for organisms to maintain shells and coral skeletons 
[1]. Water pollution is detrimental to oceanic life as well as the 
general ecosystem; this setback is not separable from humans, 
since contaminated water and food threaten public health with 
disease transmissions. Therefore, it is becoming more and 
more important to monitor pollution levels in water and 
understand how pollution affects the state of the water. 
Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) allow for quick, 
affordable, and scalable data collection and analysis of water 
conditions. The efficiency of AUVs comes from their ability 
to move without major assistance from a human controller. 
AUVs only require instructions to carry out, and they can be 
deployed at any time. This allows for repeatability in data 
collection, which is very helpful for research projects [2].  
The AUV developed in this project incorporates the pH, 
temperature, turbidity, and pressure sensors. The temperature 
sensor measured variations in temperature with varying depth. 
Warmer water could indicate more pollution, since it holds 
less oxygen, encourages the growth of bacteria, increases the 
toxicity of pollutants, and speeds up chemical reactions that 
promote algae blooms [3]. The pH sensor measures the acidity 
of the water, where greater acidity can signify the formation of 
carbonic acid from atmospheric carbon dioxide and an 
increase in ocean acidification. The turbidity sensor measures 
the cloudiness of the water, which can be related to the 
concentration of sediment and pollution within the water. By 
seeing how acidic, how cloudy, and how warm the water is 
with varying depths, the robot will be able to detect how 
pollution is related to the depth of ocean water, specifically 
the water at Dana Point. 
The goals of this project are to design and integrate sensor 
circuits that can be read on a Teensy 4.0 under the oceanic 
conditions at Dana Point, to deploy the robot safely and 
successfully at Dana Point, and to analyze retrieved data by 
comparing measured to expected values. 
This paper will outline the sensors incorporated in the AUV 
made by the team, introduce the design of the AUV, present 
the deployment data taken in the Dana Point site, analyze the 
broader implications of the deployment results, and discuss 
potential sources of error that may have caused any 
inconsistencies. 
II.вҖӢ SENSOR DESIGN 
As stated, the robot has a pressure sensor, a temperature 
sensor, a turbidity sensor, and a pH sensor. The circuits 
incorporating these sensors into the robot are designed to have 
maximum output voltage range while still being within the 
Teensy 4.0 ADC range between 0 V and 3.3 V. This way, the 
data received by the robot would have good resolution while 
keeping the voltage outputs within the TeensyвҖҷs bounds. 
A.вҖӢ Pressure Sensor 
The robot is designed to traverse a depth of 2 meters. To do 
this, an MPX5700 pressure sensor is used since it can 
accurately measure the depth underwater [4]. The MPX5700 
produces a linear analog voltage output directly proportional 
to pressure and has a low output impedance, making it suitable 
for underwater depth measurements. The circuit, as shown in 
Figure 1, uses an inverting offset op amp to fit the predicted 
voltage range from the pressure sensor onto the range of the 
Teensy, which is from 0 V to 3.3 V. To calculate all the 
resistor values of the circuit required to fit this range, Equation 
(1) is used. The choice of RF and Rn1 resulted in a gain of 10. 
1 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
Fig. 1  Pressure Sensor Circuit Design 
 
 
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
(1) 
(1 +
рқ‘…рқҗ№
рқ‘…рқ‘ӣ1 )(
рқ‘…рқ‘”
рқ‘…рқ‘”+рқ‘…рқ‘қ1 )рқ‘үрқ‘җрқ‘җвҲ’
рқ‘…рқҗ№
рқ‘…рқ‘ӣ1 рқ‘үрқ‘ӣ1 = рқ‘үрқ‘ңрқ‘ўрқ‘Ў
вҖӢ
 вҖӢ
(2) 
рқҗәрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ=
рқ‘үрқ‘ңрқ‘ўрқ‘Ў
рқ‘үрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ=вҲ’
рқ‘…рқҗ№
рқ‘…рқ‘ӣ1
 
The pressure sensor was calibrated using a tube combined 
with a meter stick, as well as a 1-meter deep tube filled with 
fresh water. After collecting the sensorвҖҷs output voltage points 
at 11 different depths, a linear graph is produced with an 
equation relating Voltage to Depth, as seen in Figure 2. The 
linear fit is very strong for this sensor, as shown by an 
R-squared value approximately equal to 1. 
 
Fresh water has a density 3% less than salt water, meaning 
that at a given depth, the pressure reading would be slightly 
more for salt water than for fresh water [5]. Although there is 
a slight difference in pressure reading from the calibration 
procedure to the deployment conditions at Dana Point, since 
the robot only travels to around 2 meter depth, this difference 
is negligible enough to still treat the fresh water calibration 
curve as valid. 
 
 
Fig. 2  Voltage vs Depth Calibration Curve for Fresh Water 
 
B.вҖӢ Temperature Sensor 
The robot is designed to be able to read temperatures 
between 14 and 24 degrees Celsius. To do this, it uses an 
MCP9701A linear temperature sensor since it is easy to read 
and interpret, and is reliable [6]. The MCP9701A produces a 
linear analog voltage output that is directly proportional to 
temperature and has a low output impedance of 20 О©, 
ensuring that it is stable and accurate. The circuit, as shown in 
Figure 3, uses an inverting offset op amp to fit the predicted 
voltage range from the pressure sensor onto the range of the 
Teensy (0 V to 3.3 V). To calculate all the resistor values 
required to fit the range, Equation (1) is used.  
 
Fig. 3  Temperature Sensor Circuit Design 
 
The temperature sensor was calibrated using a thermometer 
and 9 cups of water with different temperatures ranging from 
14В°C to 24В°C, giving a linear graph with an equation relating 
Voltage to Temperature, as seen in Figure 4. The linear fit for 
this sensor is also very strong, with an R-squared value of 
0.999. 
 
 
Fig. 4  Voltage vs Temperature Calibration Curve 
 
C.вҖӢ Turbidity Sensor 
To measure turbidity, 2 IR photodiodes (935 nm - OP950 
DK 3654-1085-ND) and an IR LED (IR1503) were used 
[7][8]. The photodiodes output a current that is directly 
proportional to the intensity of the IR light received. 
2 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Therefore, to read it from the Teensy, a transimpedance 
amplifier is required to produce readable voltage signals. As 
seen in Figure 5, a 555 timer is used to generate the on signal 
for the IR LED, and an MCP6004 op-amp is used to amplify 
the signals received by the photodiodes. The resistor in the 
photodiode circuit controls the voltage output through 
Equation (3), which is the general voltage equation for a 
circuit. Since the photodiodeвҖҷs possible current is below 18 
ВөA, the output voltage is bounded below 18 ВөA multiplied by 
the resistor chosen, which was 47 kО©. This produces a voltage 
below 0.85 V, which is well under 3.3 V, ensuring that the 
Teensy does not rail out. 
 
вҖӢ
  вҖӢ
(3) 
рқ‘ү= рқҗјрқ‘…
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5  Turbidity Sensor and 555 Timer Circuit Design 
 
The design of the turbidity can be seen in Figure 6. A 
cuvette is used to examine the sample, and all of the turbidity 
electronics are inside a box made of acrylic, which is not 
porous and is a good waterproofing material. The cuvette is 
blocked off on its sides to minimize external light 
interference, since outside light would create noise and 
negatively impact the accuracy of the turbidity results.  
 
 
 
Fig. 6  Design of the Turbidity Sensor 
 
The turbidity sensorвҖҷs calibration procedure involved using 
5 different concentrations of milk-water solutions with NTU 
values spaced between 0 and 100 NTU, giving a linear graph 
with an equation relating Voltage to Turbidity, as seen in 
Figure 7. The linear fit is strong, which is supported by the 
R-squared value of 0.926. 
 
 
Fig. 7 Voltage vs Turbidity Calibration Curve 
 
 
D.вҖӢ pH Sensor 
The robot is designed to read between a pH of 6 and 9. To 
do this, a PASCO pH electrode is used.  Knowing that the pH 
sensor is temperature sensitive, the prior linear temperature 
sensor is used to retrospectively correct the pH measurements. 
The pH electrode has an extremely high output impedance, 
typically above 10 MО©. To make up for this, the circuit, as 
shown in Figure 8, implements a unity-gain buffer to prevent 
loading effects, filter out noise, and ensure accuracy. There is 
also an inverting offset op amp to fit the predicted voltage 
range from the pH sensor onto the range of the Teensy (0V to 
3.3V). To calculate all the resistor values required to fit the 
range, Equation (1) was used. This produces a gain of 7.  
3 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Fig. 8  pH Sensor Circuit Design 
 
The pH sensor was calibrated using 6 solutions with pH 
ranging from 6 to 9, producing a linear graph with an equation 
relating Voltage to pH, as seen in Figure 9. The linear fit is 
quite reliable, given the R-squared value of 0.936. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9  Voltage vs pH Calibration Curve 
 
E.вҖӢ Additional Details 
The Teensy sampled all sensors at a rate of 20 Hz. This 
sample rate was sufficient to accurately sample data because 
temperature, pH, and turbidity change slowly over time, 
especially compared to the sampling interval of 0.05 seconds.  
Additionally, the deployment travel speed and mission 
procedure were intentionally slow, with extra hovering time to 
get ample data at each predetermined depth. Therefore, a 20 
Hz sampling rate adequately satisfies the Nyquist requirement, 
and a higher sampling rate would not meaningfully improve 
the quality of our results. 
The time constants for the sensors are sufficiently low 
relative to the length of the mission. The pressure sensor has 
an especially short time constant of 1 ms, while the pH and 
linear temperature sensors have longer time constants of 
around 30 seconds. Since the robot remains at each depth for 
45 seconds during the mission, which is larger than the time 
constants, the sensors had sufficient time to stabilize. 
 
III.вҖӢROBOT DESIGN 
 
Fig. 10 Drawing of Robot Design 
A.вҖӢ The Build 
The robot is a diving robot, going to a depth of up to 2 
meters, so it was designed to have a small and balanced frame. 
Seen in Figure 10, the main box has holes drilled on the sides 
and the bottom for motor wires, the pressure tube, the 
temperature sensor, the turbidity sensor, and the pH sensor. 
The pH sensor goes through the bottom hole of the electronics 
box, positioned so that it does not break from colliding with 
the ground. The temperature sensor wires, the pressure sensor 
tubing, and the turbidity sensor wires come out of the side 
holes of the box for simple and easy accessibility. Epoxy was 
used around each of the drilled holes to ensure proper 
waterproofing of the electronics box.  
The pressure sensor simply has a tube coming out of the 
box, which does not need any extra waterproofing besides the 
epoxy stated above. The pH sensor is the same, with just the 
sensor itself poking out of the bottom of the box. The 
temperature sensor was first waterproofed with heat shrink 
and then with parafilm. It was especially important to make 
sure the temperature was waterproofed since it was the only 
sensor with exposed wires at the end that arenвҖҷt protected by 
epoxy. The turbidity sensor was in the shape of a cube made 
with acrylic, which is known to be nonporous, and is also 
reinforced with epoxy, as seen in Figure 6. 
There are two motors positioned vertically to ensure 
balance and stronger control of the robot. There are also pool 
noodles attached to the PVC on the top ring of the robot, as 
well as metal ballasts on the bottom of the robot. This way, the 
center of mass is ensured to be below the center of buoyancy, 
which prevents the robot from flipping over and ensures 
stability. 
B.вҖӢ Mass Calculations 
The mass of the robot (without ballasts or sensors), mr, is 
expected to be 1.54kg. The pH electrode adds around 0.08kg 
4 

--- PAGE 5 ---
of 
mass, 
mpH. 
The 
pressure 
sensor 
and turbidity 
cuvette-sensor combined will add mp+t, 0.02kg. Therefore, 
the mass of the overall setup (without ballasts) can be 
calculated from the parts: 
 
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ўрқ‘ңрқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ҷ= 1. 54рқ‘ҳрқ‘”+ 0. 08рқ‘ҳрқ‘”+ 0. 02рқ‘ҳрқ‘”= 1. 64рқ‘ҳрқ‘”
C.вҖӢ Ballasting Calculations 
The buoyancy of the robot in saltwater is expected to be 
28.63N. This is calculated using the buoyancy equation seen 
in Equation (4), where the volume taken up by the robot is 
approximated as half of the electronics box added to the 
volume taken by the PVC pipes. 
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
(4) 
рқҗ№рқ‘Ҹ= ПҒрқ‘үрқ‘”
Since the expected mass of the robot is 1.64 kg, the 
expected gravitational force is 16.07 N. The difference 
between buoyancy force and gravitational force is 12.56 N, 
which, converted to kg, means 1.28 kg of metal ballasting is 
needed in salt water. 
IV.вҖӢDEPLOYMENT DETAILS 
Prior to deployment, the buoyancy and ballast calculations 
were used to estimate the amount of ballast required for 
neutral buoyancy of the robot. It is important to make sure that 
the robot is neutrally buoyant because it would make it easier 
on the robotвҖҷs motor for vertical travel, and also would 
minimize the robotвҖҷs deviation from the target depths.  
Based on mixed-layer ocean models and research on Dana 
Point Beach conditions, temperature and pH were expected to 
remain relatively constant over shallow depths between 0 and 
2 meters due to wind-induced mixing. Turbidity was expected 
to increase slightly with increased depth because suspended 
sediment concentrations are typically larger towards the 
bottom of the ocean. These expectations of our sensor 
measurements allowed for checking the reliability of the 
retrieved data as well as understanding the results. 
For the deployment at Dana Point, the robot was deployed 
far from the shore along a pier, as shown in Figure 11, so that 
it could reach at least a 2-meter depth. The robot battery was 
also disconnected anytime a team member manipulated the 
circuits to ensure safety. To prevent losing the robot, a tether is 
attached to pull it up in emergencies. The mission starts at the 
surface, and the robot implements proportional control to 
reach target depths of 0.5 m, then 1m, and then 2m. After 
reaching each target depth, the robot enters a hovering mode, 
where it maintains at the set depth for 40 seconds. Then, the 
robot enters the вҖңmotor-offвҖқ phase, a period of 5 seconds of 
motor shutdown. This prevents motor-induced noise, which 
was found to be a critical issue to data clarity in prior test 
runs. The hovering mode was necessary to reduce the robotвҖҷs 
speed immediately before the motor-off phase, minimizing 
vertical drift and improving the reliability of the measured 
data. This hovering also allowed the sensors to reach 
equilibrium values, especially the linear temperature and pH 
sensors, which have especially large time constants. 
After the mission, the robot is brought back to the surface 
and wiped dry, allowing the team to view the collected data 
from the SD card. 
 
 Fig. 11 Deployment Location in Dana Point 
 
V.вҖӢ RESULTS 
 
Figure 12 shows the deployment data at Dana Point. As 
seen by the Depth vs Time plot, the proportional control and 
the pressure sensor were working properly; supported by the 
depth markings drawn on the tether, it is certain that the data 
was collected at the desired and recorded depths. 
To analyze the data, only the data during the вҖңmotor-offвҖқ 
state of the robot is processed in order to avoid motor-induced 
noise. The averages were taken of each of the sensor readings 
during this вҖңmotor-offвҖқ phase, and the results are compiled in 
Table I.  
 
 
 
Fig. 12 Plots of Dana Point Deployment Data 
 
 
As shown, the measured temperature of around 17.5В°C 
doesn't change significantly with depth. This measured value 
is near the ground truth temperature of the surface of the 
water, as seen in Table II, which was measured with a 
thermometer to be 18.2 degrees Celsius. 
Similarly, the measured pH of 7.72 did not change with 
depth. This measured value is reasonably near the ground 
truth of pH 7.9, which was measured by Prof. Lin. 
As seen from Table I, the turbidity measurement increased 
from 12.72 NTU to 21.97 NTU as the depth increased from 
0.5 m to 1 m. It then spiked drastically to 110.83 NTU. The 
initial turbidity measurements around 0.5 m and 1 m were 
5 

--- PAGE 6 ---
near the ground truth of 23.25 NTU, which was measured 
using a turbidity meter of a Dana Point ocean water sample.  
TABLE IвҖӢ
SENSOR READING AVERAGES OVER MOTOR-OFF SETTING AT EACH 
DEPTH 
Depth 
 
(Вұ 0. 25 рқ‘ҡ)
0.5 m 
1 m 
2 m 
Temperature (В°C) 
 
(Вұ 0. 1 В°рқҗ¶)
17.34 
17.86 
17.33 
pH (
 
Вұ 0. 02)
7.72 
7.72 
7.72 
Turbidity (NTU) 
12.72 
21.97 
110.83 
TABLE IIвҖӢ
GROUND TRUTH SENSOR READINGS ON THE SURFACE LEVELS OF 
THE WATER AT DANA POINT 
Temperature (В°C) 
18.2 
pH 
7.9 
Turbidity (NTU) 
23.25 
To analyze the sensorsвҖҷ accuracy to true values, the 
measured deployment robot sensor values are compared with 
ground truth measurements taken from the surface of the 
water, outlined in Table II. The temperature sensorвҖҷs 
measurement of around 17.5 compared to the ground truth 
value of 18.2 corresponds to a percent error of 3.85%, 
calculated using Equation (5). Using the same equation, the 
pH measurement of 7.72 compared to the ground truth value 
of 7.9 yields a 2.28% percent error.  
 
вҖӢ
(5)\ 
рқ‘ғрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘җрқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў рқҗёрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ңрқ‘ҹ= вҲЈрқ‘Җрқ‘’рқ‘Һрқ‘ рқ‘ўрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘‘вҲ’рқҗәрқ‘ҹрқ‘ңрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘ рқ‘Үрқ‘ҹрқ‘ўрқ‘Ўв„ҺвҲЈ
рқҗәрқ‘ҹрқ‘ңрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘ рқ‘Үрқ‘ҹрқ‘ўрқ‘Ўв„Һ
Г—100% 
 
As stated before, the measured turbidity values at 0.5 m and 
1 m depth were reasonably close to the ground truth value of 
23.25 NTU. The discrepancies are likely caused by sensor 
calibration 
uncertainty, 
electrical 
noise, 
and unstable 
environmental 
conditions 
like 
ocean 
waves 
during 
deployment.  
Additionally, 
during 
the motor-off periods of the 
deployment, the temperature, pH, and turbidity sensors varied 
very little and had noticeably less noise. This suggests that the 
sensor performance was stable, and that removing motor noise 
had a big effect on the data. 
As expected, the temperature and pH did not change 
significantly across different depths during the deployment. 
This is because the depth of the deployment was only up to 2 
meters, which is too shallow to have meaningful variation in 
these 
parameters. 
Typically, 
significant 
variations 
in 
temperature and pH are only observed in larger depth ranges 
of hundreds or even thousands of meters in depth. This is 
especially true when talking about the mixed layer of the 
ocean, which is the topmost layer of the ocean with a depth 
that can range from around 20 meters to hundreds of meters, 
depending on the season [9]. This layer is called the mixed 
layer because of the turbulent and frequent mixing that occurs 
there, which is caused by wind-driven currents as well as 
ocean waves [9]. Therefore, it is expected that temperature 
and pH are relatively similar throughout this layer. 
The increase in turbidity makes sense, since with the ocean 
floor only around 2 meters deep in the area of deployment, 
even a small increase in depth would mean a very noticeable 
increase in sediment. The sudden spike to 110.83 NTU at a 
2-meter depth can be explained by the robot hitting the floor 
of the ocean during the mission. This occurrence noticeably 
kicked up sediment from the ocean floor and interfered with 
the turbidity sensor, resulting in a much higher turbidity 
reading. 
 
Fig. 13 Screenshot captured from the Orange County 
Health 
Care 
Agency 
website 
summarizing 
bacterial 
assessments at Dana Point [11]. 
Several factors may have caused uncertainties in our 
deployment data. The presence of ocean waves and tether 
motion could have altered the robot's depth during data 
collection. Ocean waves and tether motion could also have 
introduced fluctuations in other variables such as temperature, 
pH, and turbidity, which impact the consistency of these 
measurements. Additionally, the turbidity sensor may have 
been exposed to ambient light, which would explain the initial 
low turbidity of 12.72 NTU at a depth of 0.5 meters. 
Temperature variations in the pH probe may have also 
contributed to differences between measured and ground truth 
values. 
The collected data showed normal and healthy ocean 
temperatures, slightly basic pH values, and low surface water 
turbidity, reflecting that Dana Point water is not so affected by 
pollution. This makes sense since the area has an air quality 
index of around 40, which is deemed as good [10]. 
Additionally, as seen in Figure 13, the OC Health Care 
AgencyвҖҷs bacterial assessments deem the ocean water 
bacterial levels at the Dana Point dock as meeting state health 
standards [11]. This low bacteria level assessment indicates 
low fecal pollution, meaning that the E80 robot experiments 
were conducted in an area with minimal contamination from 
sewage and animal waste. Overall, the measurements from the 
robot make sense, as they support the cleanliness and low 
levels of pollution in the waters of Dana Point. 
 
VI.вҖӢCONCLUSION 
 
6 

--- PAGE 7 ---
In this project, a pressure sensor, a temperature sensor, a 
turbidity sensor, and a pH sensor were incorporated into an 
AUV to examine the water pollution at Dana Point and how 
each of these parameters changes with depth. Calibration plots 
were used to convert sensor voltage readings to readable data 
from which conclusions can be drawn. 
This project showcases the usefulness of AUVs, being able 
to produce repeatability in experiments with minimal human 
interference. AUVs are also shown to be a cheap and 
affordable way to perform tasks that would otherwise require 
human subjects. This includes studying the vastness of the 
ocean, monitoring water conditions, and dangerous missions 
that are impossible with human divers. However, the 
deployment at Dana Point also demonstrates the pitfalls of 
AUVs. AUVs are very susceptible to external environmental 
factors such as obstacles and ocean waves, which makes it 
harder to achieve repeatability in experiments. For example, 
the E80 robot, following the commands given, does not have 
strong adaptability and spatial awareness, which makes it 
harder to reach and maintain a set depth with waves pushing it 
around.  
Overall, the data were expected. Since Dana Point was not 
expected to be a polluted and badly managed area, the sensor 
readings included a low surface water turbidity value with 
close to neutral pH values. The temperatures and pH levels 
were all relatively constant through varying depths, which is 
expected due to the mixing of the top layers of the ocean 
caused by wind and small waves. The turbidity started off low 
and slowly increased as depth increased, which makes sense 
because sediment concentration increases as depth increases, 
especially since the ocean floor is only around 2 meters deep 
at the area of deployment. The turbidity spiked at a 2-meter 
depth, hitting an unusual 110.83 NTU for turbidity. This was 
caused by the robot hitting the bottom of the ocean floor, 
which visibly kicked up sediment and blocked the turbidity 
sensor, explaining the increase in measured turbidity. All in 
all, the measured sensor values at Dana Point matched the 
ground truths well, which supports that the water in Dana 
Point is not noticeably polluted, but is actually very clean. 
For future work, exploring further areas of the ocean would 
be impactful to see how pH, temperature, and turbidity change 
as the shore gets further and further away. Ideally, there would 
also be a wider range of depth, since a depth of 2 meters is 
well within the mixed layer of the ocean, which is not 
expected to produce a significant difference in temperature 
and pH sensor measurements. A wider range of data points 
would allow researchers to make stronger claims about the 
relationship between depth and parameters like temperature, 
pH, and turbidity, leading to stronger claims on levels of water 
pollution as well as how water pollution relates to the area of 
water. 
This project demonstrates how affordable autonomous 
underwater vehicles can support long-term and repeatable 
environmental monitoring, providing valuable data for 
examining the health of marine ecosystems and the effects of 
pollution on them. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to acknowledge Lachlan McDermott, 
Sophie Qiu, and Brannan Rosenfeld for their contributions as 
team members toward the successful deployment of the 
project. The author would like to give special thanks to 
Lachlan for saving the author from drowning. Additionally, 
the E80 professors and Lab TAs were extremely helpful in the 
authorвҖҷs growth and learning throughout the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

--- PAGE 8 ---
REFERENCES 
[1]вҖӢ
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, вҖңWhat is ocean 
acidification?,вҖқ 
NOAA, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/acidification.html  
[2]вҖӢ
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, вҖңWhat is an 
AUV?,вҖқ 
NOAA, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/ocean-fact/auv/  
[3]вҖӢ
H2O Global News, вҖңEffect of Temperature on Water Quality,вҖқ H2O 
Global 
News, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://h2oglobalnews.com/effect-of-temperature-on-water-quality/  
[4]вҖӢ
NXP Semiconductors, вҖңMPX5700 series pressure sensor data sheet,вҖқ 
NXP, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://www.nxp.com/products/sensors/pressure-sensors/vacuum-senso
rs-50-to-115-kpa/0-to-700-kpa-5-0v-gauge-pressure-sensor:MPX5700  
 
[5]вҖӢ
GoPro Caribbean, вҖңFreshwater Physics вҖ” PADI IDC and Divemaster 
Theory,вҖқ GoPro Caribbean, accessed May 8, 2026. Available: 
https://goprocaribbean.com/dive-physics-5  
[6]вҖӢ
Microchip Technology Inc., вҖңMCP9701A temperature sensor data 
sheet,вҖқ 
Microchip, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://www.microchip.com/en-us/product/MCP9701A   
[7]вҖӢ
Jameco Electronics, вҖңPIN Silicon Photodiode Type OP950,вҖқ Jameco, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://datasheet.octopart.com/OP950-TT-datasheet-7617992.pdf  
[8]вҖӢ
Everlight, вҖңTechnical Data Sheet - 5mm Infrared LED , T-1 Вҫ,вҖқ 
Everlight, 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2026. 
Available: 
https://media.digikey.com/PDF/Data%20Sheets/Everlight%20PDFs/9-I
R1503.pdf  
[9]вҖӢ
вҖңMixed layer,вҖқ Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, accessed May 8, 
2026. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mixed_layer  
[10]вҖӢ
IQAir, вҖңDana Point air quality index (AQI),вҖқ IQAir, accessed May 8, 
2026. Available: https://www.iqair.com/us/usa/california/dana-point  
[11]вҖӢ
Orange County Health Care Agency, вҖңDana Point beach information,вҖқ 
OC Health Care Agency, accessed May 8, 2026. Available: 
https://ocbeachinfo.com/danapoint/  
 
 
 
 
8 
